# Plain English Summary

More than 1000 patients have elective surgery cancelled every week in the NHS, causing anxiety for patients and families.(D Wong, 2017) Cancellations are upsetting, inefficient, may cause harm, delay treatment, and let slip therapeutic opportunities. Bed capacity is the primary reason for these cancellations. Yet bed capacity fluctuates. Operational efficiency depends on an accurate view of near-future demand, but this is challenging because a hospital is a complex system with many interdepartmental flows, and individual emergencies seem unpredictable.

This challenge can be met by operational modelling combined with Artificial Intelligence. In 2012, we built a demand forecasting solution that supports operational teams to reschedule elective surgery and reallocate resources to avoid last minute cancellations and bed shortages. We deployed and customised this for a single ward: a  cardio-thoracic critical care unit at Great Ormond Street Hospital.(C Pagel, 2017).

However, that technology could not be scaled, nor readily adapted to work in different institutions. In 2018-19, in partnership, with ‘INFORM’ (a translational data science team at University College Hospital), we generalised the underpinning mathematics of the solution and built a prototype that could scale.

Our approach is distinct from most bed modelling approaches in that we deliver forecasts that are local (ward level), and near future (over the next week). Unlike most other bed forecasting models, we predict future *demand* not future bed *utilisation*. Bed utilisation is best thought of as *demand* already mitigated by *actual supply*. More simply, we are interested in bed demand *before* not *after* cancellations have occurred. This creates a window for local teams to flex staff, reschedule lists, and try alternative strategies to better use their existing bed capacity. 

We now seek support to
1. Upgrade the AI component of the model so that it can learn from a wider range of patient clinical characteristics (lab results, clinical history, vital signs etc.) 
2. To extend the mathematics to include staffing constraints that must also influence bed availability. 
3. To encapsulate the mathematical model in a software application that is resilient and 'connectable' to electronic healthcare record systems (EHRS interoperability). Our proposed solution would importantly work at different levels of digital maturity. It would enable both hospitals using predominantly paper notes (most nonetheless have an electronic patient booking system) and hospitals that have already been fully digitised with electronic notes, blood results, prescribing and bookings. This makes the final product widely useful across the NHS.
4. To test the application with clinical and operational teams so that it 
Accurate demand forecasts will allow local teams to better plan, to find innovative local solutions to predicted bottlenecks. Improving operational efficiency will reduce costs and waste, and reducing short-notice  cancellations will reduce anxiety and suffering.
The initial application was in critical care, but this piece of work will see it generalise across a single the hospital. Where ever there are bottlenecks in elective pathways, we can provide forecasts to enable local staff to make better decisions. This applies to both surgical admissions, and other major inpatient activities such as scheduling chemotherapy, bone marrow transplants and more.
